Okay, just go right ahead. So that's what we were
thinking about on chemical characterization of
it. Then we felt that we needed to do some
processing work. One of the cries that has gone up
previously is, well, you remember two, three
years ago we had this small seeded grain in the high
plains. Well, that wouldn't process. In other
words, they'd try to run it through their steam
flaking equipment, and then the regular grain
would do all right, and that damn stuff wouldn't
do. So Dean Ray told me by phone that they had some
loads of this stuff coming up there. They were
going to try it in processing, and if it would work,
well, they'd try to work it into their rations. If
it wouldn't, well, they'd just be hands off of it.
So we thought we'd better do some processing work
on it to see what would happen to this type of
material when it is processed by the usual
methods, dry grinding, micronizing, steam
flaking, and then, of course, the wet grain
treatment reconstitution, this type of thing.
Then, too, we felt that we should do digestion work
with it And this is where Lichtenwalder is going to
come in and then do animal studies which would
involve growth and lactation and those two mainly
using dairy cattle and swine and poultry and beef
cattle and Lichtenwalder I think will probably
feed it to some lambs as well. So that's where we are
on it and of course this jar, I mean Dudley Smith sat
through this meeting with us, and he sort of
provided the administrative blessing, I guess,
for it. And it's gone from there to where this has
now been sent out to department heads and resident
directors. We're apparently in business. Could I
get a copy of that? Yeah, I haven't got anybody to
copy it today. The secretary's gone, we've got to
get this killed.
It's got some terminology in there I think that
might be helpful to us. Thank you. John, I believe
that Dudley told me that I believe this was a group,
sort of the initial task force that went down there
that included Roland Smith, the extension grain
marketing specialist. And what does this mean on
fulfilling a grain contract? I assume this is one
of the real concerns. That's it. Right after we
were down there, there was a representative of a
Japanese company in here, and
I asked him what they were, he had spent some time
looking at the situation, and he said, well, our
contracts call for number two grain, and we can get
plenty of it elsewhere. And you see, the
interesting thing was, If you go down to the lower
valley, they started earlier, and they're
harvesting down there, and they might have had 75%
of it out before the rain hit. So the grain, so the
harvest was progressing northward until it was
stopped by this heavy rain at Corpus Christi in
that area. And at that point, Norman Vestal, agent
in Oasis County, said, we got a wall-to-wall grain
sorghum in this county that's probably in the
neighborhood of 300,000 acres. And there's over
200,000 of it that's still in the field. So they
had, we'll say maybe 20-25% of their harvested up
there. In previous years when this had happened,
they only had a limited amount of this stuff. And
they could blend it with their already harvested
better grain and go ahead and send it for export.
Well, this year, when you got 75% of it like this,
you ain't got nothing to blend to it. That's right.
So there they sit with all this grain. They've
either got to bring in grain from outside the area
to blend with it or else do something else with it.
And plus the fact that it was probably in worse
condition than previously been the case, too.
Well, now, on your designated task force for the
Sargon Research, how Do you continue to work with
Extension? Or do you? There's no one on that list
from the director's office. That's right. That
was sort of an enabling act, wasn't it? Yes, it was
sort of an enabling act. Well, first off, we called
on the Extension people, Robert Rupp, area
livestock specialist, and the district agent,
Lynn Wilson, down there to can you find us some
grain that is one hybrid part of which has been
harvested before and part of which has been
harvested after this weather period. They did a
lot of looking and they never did come up with any
really. Now apparently Prairie Foundation had
some of their own that they had done this with and
they are running a test with In other words, I'm
including them right in the thing just like they
belong to the outfit. I don't see any reason not to.
And we may have the opportunity to do this with King
Ranch also since they grew a lot of grain and they
still have a lot in the field. And Steven Clayberg
and some others were here last Monday. You were
doubtless at that luncheon. He said that, well,
who knows, we might have a hurricane that'll do the
same thing to some grain that isn't already
harvested. And if it happens, well, we'll be happy
to work with you on this any way we can. But
meantime, though, we've got Lucas Reyes. And
Lucas is the agronomist. He's doing such things as
the date of planting studies and the hybrid and
variety tests. And he has provided us, from his
data planting work, 24 samples of grain that run
from 11 to about 20 pounds, 12 of which were
harvested before the rain and 12 of which were
harvested afterwards. Now these would be the same
variety. The early planting in February was
harvested before the rain. That that was planted
in, I think, about the first of April. was
harvested after the rain, but it's the same
variety, so we get the varietal difference out
here, hopefully. We got 53 samples from the outfit
down there at Corpus. Whoever and wherever and all
they came from, I'm not sure. But at any rate, we've
got them and they're identified, and there are
quantities of those that will be enough to let us do
everything except the digestibility in the
animal studies. We think with these samples from
Lucas Reyes, there will be enough to do some chick
studies, baby chick, which will be a good thing. On
that 53 now, if you don't have a control, John, how
can you really assess? Well, what we think of in
connection with those is, okay, we can look at them
chemically, we can look at them
microbiologically, and tell what we've got here.
And of course, a lot of this is going to have to be
compared on
the historical experience. In other words, I
think Pettit The group over there, they've been
doing this sort of thing. They know pretty well
what to expect in normal grain. And they're on top
of this whole business of mycotoxins and
amplitoxins and so on. So I think that's why we just
simply call it microbiological
characterization. Yeah, they'll look at, the
plan is at least, that they will look at everything
we've got. If we've got it before and after, why...
So much the better. I'm not sure what we'll get out
of the 53 varieties, frankly, except maybe a body
of information. An assessment of what is coming
in. Okay, there it is. What does it analyze? And
there are some notes made about the dates that the
things were taken and this sort of thing. And you
can tell pretty much what it looks like. But I think
the simple fact that they'll be taking grain like
that and plating it out to get an idea of what's
going to grow off of it. And that will be useful
information. Now all of this we're thinking of is
pretty short term stuff. In other words, what I'm
shooting for is to have a package of information
that we can pretty much put together and make a
publishable document of some kind by about
Christmas. So we're not talking about years on
this thing. We're talking about trying to hit it
pretty hard. And I don't think very many of the
things that we are talking about doing will take
very much time. We're talking about only an 84 day
feeding period on the cattle. Well, September,
October, November. That'll do it. We can get them
started with the first of September. And
producers, meantime, they just have store grain.
And then if we get an assessment that it really
hasn't injured feeding value all that much, then
we can move it into even the international
markets, or certainly international markets.
Now, of course, you're going to have to convince
people of this, and this is the whole idea of trying
to develop and document some definite
information. Up to now, we really don't have that
much information about it. I think everybody
knows about it. The Prairie Foundation did a
little feeding study the last time we had this, and
their story was that this, what they called black
grain, they didn't get a grade under anything
then, was just as good as far as cattle performance
is concerned as their better number two grain was.
This grain sardine that you spoke of that had
lodged completely, is that pretty much like corn?
Will it pick itself up again? Yeah, by the time we
got down there to Beeville this last time, Corpus,
we went by there and it was harvested. It was gone.
And Tom Longnecker told us that, well they didn't
have a place to store it or anything and it was all
damaged. He said we sent it all over to Perry
Foundation because we had a bunch of our own cattle
over there anyway. and therefore we sent it over
there. Did they have to have any special pickup
equipment or was it just a conventional combine? I
didn't ask you. A lot of times when something like
soybeans lodge, you have to have a special pickup
arms. Yes, this is true I think with nearly
anything that they harvest that way, with binders
and mowers and combines and the whole works. But
that's sort of where we are. We're in the process
now of trying to, well, we've got these samples,
nearly 100 of them, 53 plus 24, and I know there's
some more. We've got some from Prairie
Foundation, and I don't know, I mean, Lake Mauna
has got all of those. But we're looking at almost
100 samples of grain already. There's a lot of
these things that we can do without any further
ado. Just get at it. And the best judgment is that
you've got something in excess of a half million
acres involved. That's right. Now there's some
terrific losses. For example, Leo Welder at
Refurio had just finished combine. We visited him
on this same trip to Beville. had just finished
combining, and he said that before the rain, they
were harvesting something like 42, 4300 pounds an
acre. After the rain, they were cutting about 26.
Almost half of it. Yeah, in other words, and you
don't see it so much now, but when they first
brought this back and they first began to get dry,
he'd shake them like that and they'd just shower
out of there. All the loose stuff is gone now pretty
well, but it doesn't take too much. You can get
grain out of it still, so there's an awful lot. They
said that they probably had the biggest acreage
and the highest yield they've ever had.
But the grain market has been real funny. At the
right after that, in other words during the week of
wet weather after we were down there with this
crash meeting,
grain sorghum was selling at Corpus at about
$4.85, $4.90. And
then there was a boy in here in my office from
Dilley, which is down there by Cotulla, that way.
And I don't know whether the boy was completely
knowledgeable or not, but he said they were paying
five and a quarter farmers for grain at Dilley.
John McNeil was down here for the animal science
meetings from Amarillo, an area extension man out
there. And he said the market had absolutely gone
pot on the grain out there. Those
people out there are just not interested in the
Danish grain at all. I think probably because the
grain had ripened farther north and began to get
harvested here and on into central Texas. In other
words, the grain was moving. They weren't out of
grain out there anyway, so they began to take her
off, and there's no support price on the grain
anymore.
They better watch it that they don't crowd some of
these South Texas cattlemen into moving into the
feeding end of it and feed their own grain. Could
be. If they haven't got any market for this sort of
stuff, the old cattle in South Texas might win it
pretty well. That's right. Sure might. So,
but that's sort of our story. Well, that's great. I
hate stories about what we're going to do. Well, I
always say, John, that such a story on research is
sort of like trying to sit on a two-legged stool.
We've got a problem and we're doing something
about it, but we don't yet have a third leg with your
research results. Which will prop it up. Yeah.
So... Could I also get a copy of this U.S. Standard?
You can take that one. That's the only one I've got.
I got it from Roland Smith. I can give you another
one. All right.
I believe that would be helpful to fill in our
knowledge to make sure we don't say something. One
of the things about processing, you don't know
Charter Pierce in the micronizing process, do
you? Well, he invented, Chardo invented the
micronizing process. What is that? Which
consists, well it's a substitute for steam
flaking. Steam flaking is what's been accepted in
the cattle feeding industry pretty well. It's a
pretty energy intensive system. But Chardo
started out to pop grain. And he developed this
machine. It's nothing in the world except for
In other words, this is just a steel plate that runs
through here with a flanged edge on it to keep the
grain on. And it oscillates anyways like this.
There's a motor that just simply runs. Popcorn
shaker. Yeah, same idea as shaking it in a skillet.
And these infrared generators are lined up over
the top of it here. These are all gas. It's
gas-fired. The grain goes in here, and it dribbles
onto this skillet. and passes under these
infrared generators, and as it gets down to this
end here, it pops like this. What percentage of
moisture does it have to be to pop successfully?
Well, that's part of this thing here. And one thing
is, it's like popcorn. There's some of it that
simply won't pop, except this is the much worse
than any popcorn you ever saw. There's no
comparison. We did have some information... on
the uh influence of moisture it is right here on
percentage of pop and it looked as if it seems to be
something like that and what if it doesn't pop well
they do you can make another use of it i suppose well
and what we found out from this was that it really
doesn't need to pop anyway Because in this right
here, first thing we learned is that the darn stuff
isn't all going to pop. And therefore, to get any
information on the influence of popped grain on
animal performance, we're going to have to screen
it so we have 100% popped. So in this thing here, we
put a screen right in there, quarter-inch mesh.
And that stuff that dropped through we called
partial and non-popped. And it went through a
rotor mill and came out here. that which came on
over the screen was a hundred percent popped and it
dropped in here and came out here and then we just
plugged the thing up and let the whole mess come
together through and we called that the uh partial
and non-pop no the pop grain mixture yeah well the
important thing is that we found that all of the
heat treated grain differed from the original
grain, but these three fractions didn't differ
from one another in anything we measured, which
indicated pretty strongly that it wasn't
popping, per se, that was doing the job. It was the
heat treatment. On the basis of that, Chardo
Pierce scrapped the idea of popping grain, and he
went to the micronizing concept. And what he's
done now, instead of heating this to the popping
stage like this, he heats it to where there's only
about one or two percent that'll pop right in here.
And all that is is a practical indicator that the
grain is hot enough. And from there then, he drops
that hot grain into loosely set rolls, and you come
out with this right here. In other words, it's a
kind of a thick, spongy kind of a thing. it looks
like it's almost been flexed yeah yeah but it's
it's in strict contrast to steam flaking
which is this stuff here in other words the steam
flake is a wet process